Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie ( (listen) CHIM-ah-MAHN-də əng-GOH-zee ə-DEE-chay; born 15 September 1977) is a Nigerian writer whose works include novels, short stories and nonfiction.
She was described in The Times Literary Supplement as "the most prominent" of a "procession of critically acclaimed young anglophone authors [which] is succeeding in attracting a new generation of readers to African literature", particularly in her second home, the United States.
Adichie, a feminist, has written the novels Purple Hibiscus (2003), Half of a Yellow Sun (2006), and Americanah (2013), the short story collection The Thing Around Your Neck (2009), and the book-length essay We Should All Be Feminists (2014).
Her most recent books are Dear Ijeawele, or A Feminist Manifesto in Fifteen Suggestions (2017), Zikora (2020) and Notes on Grief (2021).
In 2008, she was awarded a MacArthur Genius Grant.
==
Early life, family, and education ==
Adichie was born in the city of Enugu in Nigeria, the fifth of six children in an Igbo family.
She was raised in the university town of Nsukka in Enugu State.
While she was growing up, her father, James Nwoye Adichie (1932–2020), worked as a professor of statistics at the University of Nigeria.
Her mother, Grace Ifeoma (1942–2021)[1], was the university's first female registrar.
The family lost almost everything during the Nigerian Civil War, including both maternal and paternal grandfathers.
Her family's ancestral village is in Abba in Anambra State.
Adichie completed her secondary education at the University of Nigeria Secondary School, Nsukka, where she received several academic prizes.
She studied medicine and pharmacy at the University of Nigeria for a year and a half.
During this period, she edited The Compass, a magazine run by the university's Catholic medical students.
At the age of 19, Adichie left Nigeria for the United States to study communications and political science at Drexel University in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
She transferred to Eastern Connecticut State University (ECSU) to be near her sister Uche, who had a medical practice in Coventry, Connecticut.
She received a bachelor's degree from ECSU, summa cum laude, in 2001.
In 2003, she completed a master's degree in creative writing at Johns Hopkins University.
In 2008, she received a master of arts degree in African studies from Yale University.
Adichie was a Hodder fellow at Princeton University during the 2005–2006 academic year.
In 2008, she was awarded a MacArthur Fellowship.
She was awarded a 2011–2012 fellowship by the Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study, Harvard University.
== Views ==
=== Religion ===
Adichie is a Catholic and was raised Catholic as a child, though she considers her views, especially those on feminism, to sometimes conflict with her religion.
At a 2017 event at Georgetown University, she stated that religion "is not a women-friendly institution" and "has been used to justify oppressions that are based on the idea that women are not equal human beings."
She has called for Christian and Muslim leaders in Nigeria to preach messages of peace and togetherness.
=== Race ===
As a youth in Nigeria, Adichie was not accustomed to being identified by the colour of her skin, which only began to happen when she arrived in the United States for college.
As a black African in America, Adichie was confronted with what it meant to be a person of colour in the United States.
Race as an idea became something that she had to navigate and learn.
She writes about this in her novel Americanah.
=== LGBT issues ===
Adichie supports LGBT rights in Nigeria and all of Africa; in 2014, when Nigeria passed an anti-homosexuality bill, she was among the Nigerian writers who objected to the law, calling it unconstitutional and "a strange priority to a country with so many real problems," stating that a crime is a crime for a reason because a crime has victims, and that since consensual homosexual conduct between adults does not constitute a crime, the law is unjust.
Adichie was also close friends with Kenyan openly gay writer Binyavanga Wainaina, and when he died on 21 May 2019 after suffering a stroke in Nairobi, Adichie said in her tribute that she was struggling to stop crying.
In 2017, Adichie was criticized by some as transphobic, initially for saying that "my feeling is trans women are trans women."
Adichie later further clarified her statement, writing "that there is a distinction between women born female and women who transition, without elevating one or the other, which was my point.
I have and will continue to stand up for the rights of transgender people.
"
In 2020, Adichie weighed into "all the noise" sparked by J. K. Rowling's article on sex and gender, and called Rowling's essay "perfectly reasonable."
Adichie again faced accusations of transphobia, some of which came from Nigerian author Akwaeke Emezi, who had graduated from Adichie's writing workshop.
In response to the backlash, Adichie criticised cancel culture, saying: "There's a sense in which you aren't allowed to learn and grow.
Also forgiveness is out of the question.
I find it so lacking in compassion.
"
In a June 2021 essay titled "It Is Obscene", Adichie again criticised cancel culture, discussing her experiences with two unnamed writers who attended her writing workshop and later lambasted her on social media for her comments on transgender people.
She described their "passionate performance of virtue that is well executed in the public space of Twitter but not in the intimate space of friendship" as "obscene".
== Writing career ==
Ngozi Adichie's original and initial inspiration came from Chinua Achebe, after reading his 1958 novel Things Fall Apart, at the age of 10; Adichie was inspired by seeing her own life represented in the pages.
She has also named Buchi Emecheta as a Nigerian literary precursor, on whose death Adichie said: "Buchi Emecheta.
We are able to speak because you first spoke.
Thank you for your courage.
Thank you for your art.
Nodu na ndokwa."
Adichie published a collection of poems in 1997 (Decisions) and a play (For Love of Biafra) in 1998.
Her short story "My Mother, the Crazy African", dating from when Adichie was a college senior living in Connecticut, discusses the problems that arise when a person is facing two cultures that are complete opposites from each other.
On one hand, there is a traditional Nigerian culture with clear gender roles, while in America there is more freedom in how genders act, and less restrictions on younger people.
Ralindu, the protagonist, faces this challenge with her parents as she grew up in Philadelphia, while they grew up in Nigeria.
Adichie dives deep into gender roles and traditions and what problems can occur because of this.
In 2002, she was shortlisted for the Caine Prize for African Writing for her short story "You in America", and her story "That Harmattan Morning" was selected as a joint winner of the 2002 BBC World Service Short Story Awards.
In 2003, she won the O. Henry Award for "The American Embassy", and the David T. Wong International Short Story Prize 2002/2003 (PEN Center Award).
Her stories were also published in Zoetrope: All-Story, and Topic Magazine.
Her first novel, Purple Hibiscus (2003), received wide critical acclaim; it was shortlisted for the Orange Prize for Fiction (2004) and was awarded the Commonwealth Writers' Prize for Best First Book (2005).
Purple Hibiscus starts with an extended quote from Things Fall Apart.
Her second novel, Half of a Yellow Sun (2006), named after the flag of the short-lived nation of Biafra, is set before and during the Nigerian Civil War.
Adichie has said of Buchi Emecheta's Destination Biafra (1982): " [It] was very important for my research when I was writing Half of a Yellow Sun."
Half of a Yellow Sun received the 2007 Orange Prize for Fiction and the Anisfield-Wolf Book Award.
Half of a Yellow Sun was adapted into a film of the same title directed by Biyi Bandele, starring BAFTA award-winner and Academy Award nominee Chiwetel Ejiofor and BAFTA winner Thandiwe Newton, and was released in 2014.
Adichie's third book, The Thing Around Your Neck (2009), is a collection of 12 stories that explore the relationships between men and women, parents and children, Africa and the United States.
In 2010 she was listed among the authors of The New Yorker's "20 Under 40" Fiction Issue.
Adichie's story "Ceiling" was included in the 2011 edition of The Best American Short Stories.
Her third novel Americanah (2013), an exploration of a young Nigerian encountering race in America was selected by The New York Times as one of "The 10 Best Books of 2013".
In April 2014, she was named as one of 39 writers aged under 40 in the Hay Festival and Rainbow Book Club project Africa39, celebrating Port Harcourt UNESCO World Book Capital 2014.
In a 2014 interview, Adichie said on feminism and writing: "I think of myself as a storyteller but I would not mind at all if someone were to think of me as a feminist writer...
I'm very feminist in the way I look at the world, and that world view must somehow be part of my work.
"
In 2015, she was co-curator of the PEN World Voices Festival.
In March 2017, Americanah was picked as the winner for the "One Book, One New York" program, part of a community reading initiative encouraging all city residents to read the same book.
Her next book, Dear Ijeawele, or A Feminist Manifesto in Fifteen Suggestions, published in March 2017, had its origins in a letter Adichie wrote to a friend who had asked for advice about how to raise her daughter as a feminist.
In April 2017, it was announced that Adichie had been elected into the 237th class of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, one of the highest honours for intellectuals in the United States, as one of 228 new members to be inducted on 7 October 2017.
In 2020, Adichie published Zikora, a stand-alone short story about sexism and single motherhood.
In November 2020, Half of a Yellow Sun was voted by the public to be the best book to have won the Women's Prize for Fiction in its 25-year history.
In May 2021, Adichie released a memoir based on her father's death titled Notes on Grief, based on an essay of the same title published in The New Yorker in September 2020.
As described by the reviewer for The Independent, "Her words put a welcome, authentic voice to this most universal of emotions, which is also one of the most universally avoided."
== Lectures ==
Adichie spoke on "The Danger of a Single Story" for TED in 2009.
It has become one of the most-viewed TED Talks of all time with over 27 million views.
On 15 March 2012, she delivered the "Connecting Cultures" Commonwealth Lecture 2012 at the Guildhall, London.
Adichie also spoke on being a feminist for TEDxEuston in December 2012, with her speech "We should all be feminists".
It initiated a worldwide conversation on feminism and was published as a book in 2014.
It was sampled for the 2013 song "***Flawless" by American performer Beyoncé, where it attracted further attention.
=== "The Danger of a Single Story" ===
Adichie spoke in a TED talk entitled "The Danger of a Single Story", posted in July 2009, in which she expressed her concern for under-representation of various cultures.
She explained that as a young child, she had often read American and British stories where the characters were primarily of Caucasian origin.
At the lecture, she said that the under-representation of cultural differences could be dangerous.
Adichie concluded the lecture by noting the significance of different stories in various cultures and the representation that they deserve.
She advocated for a greater understanding of stories because people are complex, saying that by understanding only a single story, one misinterprets people, their backgrounds and their histories.
The talk has become one of the most-viewed TED Talks of all time with over 27 million views.
Since 2009, she revisited the topic when speaking to audiences such as the Hilton Humanitarian Symposium of the Conrad N. Hilton Foundation in 2019.
===
"We should all be feminists" ===
In 2012, Adichie gave a TEDx talk entitled: "We should all be feminists", delivered at TedXEuston in London, which has been viewed more than five million times.
She shared her experiences of being an African feminist, and her views on gender construction and sexuality.
Adichie said that the problem with gender is that it shapes who we are.
She also said: "I am angry.
Gender as it functions today is a grave injustice.
We should all be angry.
Anger has a long history of bringing about positive change, but in addition to being angry, I'm also hopeful because I believe deeply in the ability of human beings to make and remake themselves for the better."
==== "Flawless" song ====
Parts of Adichie's TEDx talk were sampled in Beyoncé's song "Flawless" in December 2013.
Fourth Estate published an essay based on the speech as a stand-alone volume, We Should All Be Feminists, in 2014.
Adichie later said in an NPR interview that "anything that gets young people talking about feminism is a very good thing".
She later qualified the statement in an interview with the Dutch newspaper De Volkskrant: "Another thing I hated was that I read everywhere: now people finally know her, thanks to Beyoncé, or: she must be very grateful.
I found that disappointing.
I thought: I am a writer and I have been for some time and I refuse to perform in this charade that is now apparently expected of me: 'Thanks to Beyoncé, my life will never be the same again.'
That's why I didn't speak about it much.
"
Adichie has clarified that her particular feminism differs from Beyoncé's, particularly in their disagreements about the role occupied by men in women's lives, saying: "Her style is not my style but I do find it interesting that she takes a stand in political and social issues since a few years.
She portrays a woman who is in charge of her own destiny, who does her own thing, and she has girl power.
I am very taken with that."
Nevertheless, Adichie has been outspoken against critics who question the singer's credentials as a feminist, and has said: "Whoever says they're feminist is bloody feminist."
== Personal life ==
In 2009, Adichie married Ivara Esege, a Nigerian doctor.
In a July 2016 interview, she revealed that she had recently given birth to a daughter.
Adichie divides her time between the United States and Nigeria, where she teaches writing workshops.
== Awards and nominations ==
In 2016, she was conferred an honorary degree, Doctor of Humane letters, honoris causa, by Johns Hopkins University.
In 2017, she was conferred honorary degrees, Doctor of Humane letters, honoris causa, by Haverford College and The University of Edinburgh.
In 2018, she received an honorary degree, Doctor of Humane Letters, from Amherst College.
She received an honorary degree, doctor honoris causa, from the Université de Fribourg, Switzerland, in 2019.
On 20 May 2019, Ngozi Adichie received an honorary degree from Yale University.
A^  Shortlisted
B^  Runner-up
C^  Joint win
D^  Longlisted
===
Other recognition ===
2010 Listed among The New Yorker's "20 Under 40"
2013 Listed among The New York Times' "Ten Best Books of 2013", for Americanah
2013 Listed among the BBC's "Top Ten Books of 2013", for Americanah
2013 Foreign Policy magazine "Top Global Thinkers of 2013"
2013 Listed among the New African's "100 Most Influential Africans 2013"
2014 Listed among Africa39 project of 39 writers aged under 40
2015 Listed among Time Magazine's "The 100 Most Influential People"
2015 Commencement Speaker at Wellesley College
2017 Commencement Speaker at Williams College
2018 Class Day Speaker for Harvard University.
2019 Class Day Speaker for Yale University.
Adichie was one of 15 women selected to appear on the cover of the September 2019 issue of British Vogue, guest-edited by Meghan, Duchess of Sussex.
Adichie was cited as one of the Top 100 most influential Africans by New African magazine in 2019.
Chimamanda was also elected in March 2017 into the American Academy of Arts and Letters.
This made her the second Nigerian to be given such an honour, after Prof.
Wole Soyinka.
She was listed among the 40 Honorary members from 19 different countries.
== Bibliography ==
=== Books ===
===
Short fiction ===
== Discography ==
Guest appearances
"Flawless" (Beyoncé featuring Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie)
==
See also ==
List of Nigerian women writers
Postcolonial feminist literature
== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
Ernest N. Emenyonu (ed.), A Companion to Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie, James Currey/Boydell and Brewer, 2017, ISBN 978-1847011633
Ojo, Akinleye Ayinuola.
Discursive Construction of Sexuality and Sexual Orientations in Chimamanda Adichie's Americanah.
Ibadan Journal of English Studies 7 (2018): 543-560-224.
== External links ==
Official website 
Adichie on Twitter
Adichie on Facebook
Britannica about Adichie
Unofficial website via Daria Tunca, English Department, University of Liège.
Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie at TED 
"The Danger of a Single Story".
TED.
July 2009.
"We should all be feminists".
TEDx Euston.
12 April 2013.
Messud, Claire, ed. (1 February 2010).
"Quality Street".
Guernica Magazine.
Archived from the original on 14 March 2010.
Adichie, Chimamanda Ngozi (15 January 2012).
"Why Are You Here?".
Guernica Magazine.
Anya, Ikechuku (15 October 2005).
"In the Footsteps of Achebe: Enter Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie".
African Writer.
Murray, Senan (8 June 2007).
"The new face of Nigerian literature?".
BBC News.
"Michio Kaku, Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie and Angela Hobbs" (Audio).
The Forum.
BBC World Service.
13 April 2008.
Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie: Commonwealth Lecture 2012 on YouTube. 16 March 2012.
"Why Chimamanda Adichie Will Not 'Shut Up'".
Frankfurt Book Fair 2018. 19 October 2018.
"'I am a pessimistic optimist': Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie answers authors' questions".
The Guardian.
4 December 2020.
